---
layout: workshop
title: Files & IO
back: /course/day2/13
next: /course/day3/15
---

### Hello, World!
If you have seen any kind of computer programming before, you are probably aware of a quite famous program called "[Hello, World!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%22Hello,_World!%22_program)".

Here it is in APL:
```APL
      ⎕←'Hello, World!'
```

If you have learned programming before, maybe it is strange to have gotten so far in an introductory tutorial without meeting the language's "print" function.

### Back 2 School 4 Maths

!!! 

multiline dfns

!!!

The function `Test` will ask the user `⍵` single-digit arithmetic questions, and return the number of correct answers.

```APL
      Test←{                                 
         ⍺←0                          
         s←⍎⎕←⍕(?10),('+-×÷'[?4]),?10 
         a←⎕                          
         p←⍺+a≡s                      
         ⍵>1:p ∇ ⍵-1                  
         ⎕←'You scored',p,'points' ⋄ p
      }  
      
      Test 3
```

Examine the `Test` function and try it out. Which line asks for user input?

You will see that it is quite possible to cheat the `Test` function by entering the same expression. To be even more sly, simply move the text cursor with the up arrow to the printed problem statement and press `Enter`.

To ameliorate this, we can *verify and fix input* with `⎕VFI`. Also note the use of *quote-quad* `⍞`. 

```APL      
      Test2←{
         ⍺←0
         s←⍎⎕←⍕(?10),('+-×÷'[?4]),?10
         i←⍞
         a←⊃(//⎕VFI)i
         p←⍺+a≡,s
         ⍵>1:p ∇ ⍵-1
         ⎕←'You scored',p,'points' ⋄ p
      }
      
      Test 3
```

{% include note.html content="By default, non-assignment expressions output results to the session log. We strongly recommend using <code class='language-APL'>⎕←</code> when you deliberately intend for an expression to print to the session log. You are then able to search <code class='language-APL'>Ctrl+F</code> for print statements." %}

#### System Functions

{% include note.html content="This section requires some particular files which can be downloaded from <a href='https://github.com/rikedyp/APLWorkshop'>https://github.com/rikedyp/APLWorkshop</a>" %}

So `⎕` and `⍞` can be used for input and output. However, there are also the so-called [*quad-names*](https://aplwiki.com/wiki/Quad_name) which all have a name beginning with `⎕`.

Some quad-names are constants, such as `⎕A`, `⎕D` and `⎕AV`. Others are [*system-functions*](http://help.dyalog.com/18.0/#Language/System%20Functions/Summary%20Tables/System%20Functions%20Categorised.htm), many of which are similar to system command counterparts.

|System Command|System Function|
|---|---|
|`)SAVE /path/to/WorkspaceFile`|`⎕SAVE'/path/to/WorkspaceFile'`|
|`)LOAD /path/to/WorkspaceFile`|`⎕LOAD'/path/to/WorkspaceFile'`|
|`)ERASE name`|`⎕EX'name'`|

In contrast to the system commands, which can only be used in the interactive session, system-functions can be used in a function (A.K.A. *under program control*).

#### Native Files

1. `'RegionMonthTempStream'` is a file of 64-bit floating point values. The stream contains temperature data for `7` continents. Each region has `300` average monthly temperatures from the years `1995` to `1999` inclusive.
    1. Tie the file to the active workspace for reading and writing using `⎕NTIE`. 
    ```APL
          tn ← '/path/to/RegionMonthTempStream' ⎕NTIE 0
    ```
    1. Read [the documentation for `⎕NREAD`](http://help.dyalog.com/18.0/#Language/System Functions/nread.htm) and store the data from `'RegionMonthTempStream'` into a variable called `tempdata`.
    1. Untie the file so that it is free for other programs to use. Then expunge `tn` from the workspace.
        ```APL
              ⎕NUNTIE tn ⋄ ⎕EX'tn'
        ```

Generally the `⎕N...` family of system functions are for reading and writing *native files* as described in the documentation. `⎕NGET` and `⎕NPUT` are useful for reading and writing text files without having to tie and untie them.

```APL
      (⊂words)⎕NPUT'words.txt'
      words←⊃⎕NGET'words.txt'
```

Dyalog has some system functions for dealing with some popular file types. These are `⎕CSV`, `⎕XML` and `⎕JSON`. `⎕XML` and `⎕JSON` are particularly useful for communicating via the internet and with web browsers.

1. `'RegionMonthAvgTemp.csv' is a file of [comma separated values](). It contains the same numeric data as `'RegionMonthTempStream' but a heading and additional text metadata.

    1. Load the data into the workspace using `⎕CSV`.
        ```APL
              ⎕←3↑csv←⎕CSV'RegionMonthAvgTemp.csv'
        ```

### Dyalog Component Files

1. Why would you want to use `)SAVE` instead of `⎕SAVE`?

#### Graphics
